kep-5278: nominated node name for an expected pod placement (#5287)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/5278-nominated-node-name-for-expectation/README.md

Pod binding may take significant amount of time (even at the order of minutes, e.g. due to volume binding).
During that time, scheduler may be restarted, lost its leader lock etc.
Given the placement decision was only stored in schedulers memory, the new incarnation of the scheduler
has no visibility into it and can decide to put a pod on a different node. This would result in wasting
the work that has already been done and increase the end-to-end pod startup latency.

We need a mechanism to be able to resume the already started work in majority of such situations.

#### Story 3: ClusterAutoscaler or Karpenter can influence scheduling decisions

ClusterAutoscaler or Karpenter perform scheduling simulations to decide what nodes should be
added to make pending pods schedulable. Their decisions assume a certain placement - if pending
pods are placed differently, they may not fit on the newly added nodes or may not satisfy their
scheduling constraints.

In order to improve the end-to-end pod startup latency when cluster scale-up is needed, we need a
mechanism to communicate the results of scheduling simulations from ClusterAutoscaler or Karpenter
to scheduler.

> 

Reviewer: Based on our discussion on the other PR - maybe add something like this:

```
#### Story43: Kueue specifies `NominatedNodeName` to indicate where it prefers pods being scheduled to

Kueue supports scheduling features that are not (yet) supported in core scheduling, such as topology-aware scheduling. When it determines the optimal placement, it needs a mechanism to pass that information to the scheduler.
Currently it is using NodeSelector to enforce placement of pods and only then ungates the pods. Scheduler doesn't take that information into account until pods are ungated and can schedule other pods in those places in the meantime. It would be beneficial to pass that information to scheduler sooner, as well as allow scheduler to change the decision if the topology constraints are just the soft ones.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

#### NominatedNodeName can already be set by other components now.

There aren't any guardrails preventing other components from setting NominatedNodeName now.
In such cases, the semantic is not well defined now and the outcome of it may not match user
expectations.

This KEP is a step towards clarifying this semantic instead of maintaining status-quo.

#### Confusing semantics of `NominatedNodeName`

Up until now, `NominatedNodeName` was expressing the decision made by scheduler to put a given
pod on a given node, while waiting for the preemption. The decision could be changed later so
it didn't have to be a final decision, but it was describing the "current plan of record".

If we put more components into the picture (e.g. ClusterAutoscaler and Karpenter), we effectively
get a more complex state machine, with the following states:

1. pending pod
1. pod proposed to node (by external component) [not approved by scheduler]
1. pod nominted to node (based on external proposal) and waiting for node (e.g. being created & ready)
1. pod nominated to node and waiting for preemption
1. pod allocated to node and waiting for binding

> 1. pod bound

Reviewer 2: Fix the numbered list (make 1-6)?

- No negative feedback or bug.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

**Upgrade**

During the beta period, the feature gate `NominatedNodeNameForExpectation` is enabled by default, so users don't need to opt in.

**Downgrade**

Users need to disable the feature gate, and restart kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver.

### Version Skew Strategy

If kube-apiserver's version is older than kube-scheduler,
and doesn't have the implementation change from this KEP,
`NominatedNodeName` won't be cleared at the binding api call. 
So, ideally, users should use the same version of kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver.

However, it's not that not clearing `NominatedNodeName` will actually cause something wrong in the scheduling flow, 
but, it's just that that might lead to a user's confusion, 
as discussed in [Confusion if `NominatedNodeName` is different from `NodeName` after all](#confusion-if-nominatednodename-is-different-from-nodename-after-all).

So, we can say the risk caused by this version difference would be fairly low.

On the other hand, even if kube-apiserver's version is newer than kube-scheduler,
and doesn't have the implementation change from this KEP,

> nothing goes wrong because kube-apiserver just clears `NominatedNodeName` from the pods.

Author: Oops, fixed the sentense to clarify what I meant.

> nothing goes wrong because kube-apiserver just clears `NominatedNodeName` from the pods.

Reviewer: thanks - it makes sense now

[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Use `NominatedNodeName` to express an pod placement, expected by the scheduler or expected by other components.

> The scheduler puts `NominatedNodeName` at the beginning of binding cycles to show an expected pod placement to other components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Besides of using `NominatedNodeName` to indicate ongoing preemption, the scheduler can specify it at the beginning of a binding cycle to show an expected pod placement to other components.
```

Reviewer: +1

pods are placed differently, they may not fit on the newly added nodes or may not satisfy their
scheduling constraints.

In order to improve the end-to-end pod startup latency when cluster scale-up is needed, we need a
mechanism to communicate the results of scheduling simulations from ClusterAutoscaler or Karpenter
to scheduler.

#### Story4: Kueue specifies `NominatedNodeName` to indicate where it prefers pods being scheduled to

Kueue supports scheduling features that are not (yet) supported in core scheduling, such as topology-aware scheduling. 
When it determines the optimal placement, it needs a mechanism to pass that information to the scheduler.
Currently it is using NodeSelector to enforce placement of pods and only then ungates the pods. Scheduler doesn't take that information into account until pods are ungated and can schedule other pods in those places in the meantime. 
It would be beneficial to pass that information to scheduler sooner, as well as allow scheduler to change the decision if the topology constraints are just the soft ones.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### NominatedNodeName can already be set by other components now.

> There aren't any guardrails preventing other components from setting NominatedNodeName now.

Author: Where is that.

> There aren't any guardrails preventing other components from setting NominatedNodeName now.

Reviewer 3: Who has permission to update PodStatus today?

In such cases, the semantic is not well defined now and the outcome of it may not match user
expectations.

> This KEP is a step towards clarifying this semantic instead of maintaining status-quo.

Reviewer: kube-scheduler is treating is a hint to try a given node first. So yes - it does validation, it never blindly accepts that.

> This KEP is a step towards clarifying this semantic instead of maintaining status-quo.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we analyze cases how a validation may fail and how scheduler communicates that?

For instance what if there is overallocation? We have legitimate overallocation case in preemption and we also know there can be race setting NNN due to our async (delayed) api calls.

4. pod nominated to node and waiting for preemption
5. pod allocated to node and waiting for binding
6. pod bound

The important part is that if we decide to use `NominatedNodeName` to store all that information,
we're effectively losing the ability to distinguish between those states.

We may argue that as long as the decision was made by the scheduler, the exact reason and state
probably isn't that important - the content of `NominatedNodeName` can be interpreted as
"current plan of record for this pod from scheduler perspective".

But the `pod proposed to node` state is visibly different. In particular external components
may overallocate the pods on the node, those pods may not match scheduling constraints etc.
We can't claim that it's a current plan of record of the scheduler. It's a hint that we want
scheduler to take into account.

In other words, from state machine perspective, there is visible difference in who set the
`NominatedNodeName`. If it was scheduler, it may mean that there is already ongoing preemption.
If it was an external component, it's just a hint that may even be ignored.

> However, if we look from consumption point of view - these are effectively the same. We want

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say so. Nomination hints may be not intentionally wrong and the system is not able to distinguish whether the nomination is really accepted by the system and should be the "plan of the record" or is incorrect, but we don't have a mechanism to clear or correct it.

Reviewer: If scheduler doesn't have a better option in mind - it effectively is a plan of the record for the system. And scheduler can change it (but it can change it now too).

Author: As I mentioned in several places, can you show some example scenarios that cause trouble if we cannot distinguish them? I just haven't heard anything, and hence we keep this design like this from the beginning. I do know we cannot distinguish, but at the same time I don't know what happens if we cannot. Without that, we cannot discuss this matter on the same page.

----

Here's a detailed my assumption (basically all the discussion happened at https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5329#discussion_r2102397587), if it helps:

In the first place, we must assume that the nomination set by the scheduler preemption could also be wrong. 
So, anyone (including the scheduler preemption, cluster autoscaler, and any external components) can be wrong. Some of them might be because they don't do enough scheduling simulation. But, another reason here is because there's an inevitable time gap between when they compute the cluster state and put NNN, and when the scheduling cycle actually processes the pod. So, even if the scheduling simulation is perfect, NNN could be wrong, and that's the reason we're saying NNN is the best effort.
So, essentially the scheduler preemption vs external components: I don't see the difference. Both of them are: 1. compute things, 2. put NNN, 3. maybe change the cluster state (2 and 3 can be opposite or async depending on the components) 
And, in order to wait for (3) to be completed (in case of CA, that's a node creation, in case of the preemption, that's a pod termination, etc), other components should take NNN into consideration to prevent the double effort to make the pod schedulable, regardless of who set NNN. After all, if (3) fails, or (3) completes, but NNN is not longer correct (e.g., CA creates a new node, but the node is filled by other high priority pods), then the component should clear NNN, or update with a new value. 
This is the reason of this statement here in the KEP: "if we look from consumption point of view - these are effectively the same. We want to expose the information, that as of now a given node is considered as a potential placement"

Reviewer: > To add to my last comment though, I'm not saying we shouldn't separate fields. It's just that I don't see the need of doing it right now, and we can do that later when actually we see the need of that.

Provided that we can do that in an additive way, which we believe we can. So i agree with that.

to expose the information, that as of now a given node is considered as a potential placement
for a given pod. It may change, but for now that's what considered. 

Eventually, we may introduce some state machine, where external components could also approve
schedulers decisions by exposing these states more concretely via the API. But we will be
able to achieve it in an additive way by exposing the information about the state.

However, we don't need this state machine now, so we just introduce the following rules:
- Any component can set `NominatedNodeName` if it is currently unset.
- Scheduler is allowed to overwrite `NominatedNodeName` at any time in case of preemption or
the beginning of the binding cycle.
- No external components can overwrite `NominatedNodeName` set by a different component.

> - If `NominatedNodeName` is set, the component who set it is responsible for updating or

Reviewer 3: How a component can know that it set the NNN (owns it)?

Reviewer 3: Technically it's doable, but I think that metadata are different level information that is designed to assure consistency of api-server updates. It does not seem right to use it to denote ownership (who updated a field first wins the ownership, unless it's kube-scheduler).

Shall such components watch if kube-scheduler haven't overwritten their hint and give up updating it anymore unless kube-scheduler clears it (which it rarely, but sometimes does)? Can component set NNN again? I guess autoscaler could set it again, but what if Kueue want to perform its follow up scheduling (because previous one was incorrect)? It cannot overwrite becuause it does not own it anymore?

My thinking is that allowing may components to write to the same field is something that we don't typically do in Kubernetes. If we do, then there is a common pattern to sync to the current state and reconsider the decision. In our case we'd have more complicated rule as described above.

I know how we can reuse this field to denote decisions or intentions made by kube-scheduler and I'd prefer to keep the ownership of this field and possibly extend it when we know how the resource reservation should work. We now 
effectively enable resource reservation and many schedulers, but with very imperfect story behind it that maybe address autoscaler case, but nothing more.

Author: > It does not seem right to use it to denote ownership (who updated a field first wins the ownership, unless it's kube-scheduler).

Hmm, I'm not sure why it doesn't look right to you. Is it mentioned somewhere as a bad practice, or do you have a specific reason? If it looks really weird to use it, I'm fine to create another supplemental field to declare "who set NNN", but I'm not very sure if using `ManagedFields` is so bad that we have to explicitly create such a new field to declare the ownership.

> Shall such components watch if kube-scheduler haven't overwritten their hint and give up updating it anymore unless kube-scheduler clears it (which it rarely, but sometimes does)? 

If kube-scheduler set it, they shuoldn't update NNN because NNN value is not theirs anymore.

> Can component set NNN again?

As long as NNN's value is set by themselves, they can decide whether to clear it or update it with a new node name. (if their NNN is not valid anymore)

> what if Kueue want to perform its follow up scheduling (because previous one was incorrect)? It cannot overwrite becuause it does not own it anymore?

Ideally, Kueue should clear or update it when it observes `PodScheduled: false`, which indicates their NNN didn't work. It can overwrite because it's still theirs, unless NNN is overwritten by the scheduler.

But, for the long term, especially for a _required_ TAS, we should allow it to perform a follow-up scheduling in a better way because they can't modify the required node selector after un-gating the pods. (NodeSelector is immutable when it's un-gated)

This NNN + required node selector would have a general usecase for such an external scheduler. What we need for such external schedulers is to somehow allow them to mutate the required node selector even after un-gating the pods, or allow them to gate the pods again to modify the selector.
After those kind of improvement is done, Kueue with a required TAS (or some other external schedulers) can perform re-computing and update NNN with the required node selector, when it observes `PodScheduled: false`.

A bit went off track, but that's the whole context that I have for Kueue/external scheduler stuff. (Full discussion can be found at https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5329#discussion_r2102397587)

> My thinking is that allowing may components to write to the same field is something that we don't typically do in Kubernetes. 

Right, that's the reason we have a clear rule that NNN has to be owned by the component who set it, and only the owner component or the scheduler can update/clear it.

> We now effectively enable resource reservation and many schedulers, but with very imperfect story behind it that maybe address autoscaler case, but nothing more.

I don't get what you want to say around this. You don't want to enable resource reservations made by other components at all? Please explicitly point out what is an imperfect story you're feeling, or I'd say, a problem on the current proposal.

Reviewer 4: I think one place where a field is not owned by a single component is `unschedulable` field in node spec. IIUC we don't generally know who cordoned a node (kubectl or some automation) but whoever did it has to assume it is safe to un-cordon, even though there may be some other controller that would like to keep the node cordoned. Are there other fields like this?

Reviewer 3: > Currently we let the Pod stay Pending. To mitigate this user can configure "waitForPodsReady" which after a timeout (5min) will evict the entire Job (with all Pods), and re-try queuing and scheduling from scratch.

It sounds reasonable to keep the resources "reserved" for that time then. Obviously some higher priority pods could still jump in that place.

Reviewer 5: > @mimowo Please note that we brought back the Kueue use case, so setting NNN by Kueue can speed up scheduling of some bigger workloads.

Awesome!

clearing it if its plans were changed (using PUT or APPLY to ensure it won't conflict with
potential update from scheduler) to reflect the new hint.

Moreover:
- Regardless of who set `NominatedNodeName`, its readers should always take that into
consideration (e.g. ClusterAutoscaler or Karpenter when trying to scale down nodes).

> - In case of faulty components (e.g. overallocation the nodes), these decisions will

Reviewer 3: This is the most problematic case. Incorrect or faulty decisions would influence cluster behavior and for instance prevent cluster scale down. I don't think it's a good idea.

Clearing NNN by scheduler would open a possiblity for other components to race for setting NNN (for instance Kueue and autoscaling). I really think that we need separate conecpt of nominated resource hints (not only for nodes) which would be solely owned by external components. Scheduler would convert them to NNN as soon as it let a pod go through a scheduling cycle. 

It's debatable where exactly it should happen, I think that in Reserve or even earlier (unschedulable pod can have NNN set if a nominated Pod does not exist yet or if it's not ready yet like in Node Readiness Gates proposal).

Author: > Do we want to allow the system to consume potentially incorrect decisions of other components which kube-scheduler is not able to correct?

Right, the scheduler cannot determine "this NNN is invalid". 
I believe other components have to take this decision into consideration because NNN is a general sign that "someone is working on making this pod scheduled there". ("someone" might be the cluster autoscaler, might be the scheduler preemption process, etc.)
The other components have to take it into consideration so that it doesn't perform any double effort for the same pod. For example, CA ignores pods with NNN set by the preemption today because it believes "NNN is set -> the preemption happens -> no need to create a new node". Similar idea.

> If you propose how to correct it, why it's not a part of this KEP?

I don't propose kube-scheduler correct it because the component that set NNN is the only person who can tell "this NNN is invalid". Instead, I propose that the component that set NNN is responsible for updating/clearing NNN when it becomes invalid. 

For example, the cluster autoscaler sets NNN on non-existing node. From the scheduler pov, it cannot tell whether this NNN is valid (= a new node is coming, on its way) or this NNN is not valid anymore (= CA creates the node, but somehow the creation fails). What the scheduler can do is only to believe:
- As long as NNN is there, the cluster autoscaler is correctly scaling up a new instance, and so far so good.
- If NNN becomes invalid, the cluster autoscaler should immediately clear it (or update it with a new one)

Reviewer 3: > For example, the cluster autoscaler sets NNN on non-existing node. From the scheduler pov, it cannot tell whether this NNN is valid (= a new node is coming, on its way) or this NNN is not valid anymore (= CA creates the node, but somehow the creation fails).

This is also a good case. What will happen when the node finally appears, but has initial taints that prevent scheduling? Shall scheduler find new NNN for those pods then?

Author: As stated, the scheduler doesn't clear NNN on its own, which allows us to address your scenario. So, the scheduler _keeps_ trying NNN node (new tainted node) first until the taints are removed, unless the pod triggers the preemption and NNN is updated by the scheduler.

Reviewer: > This is also a good case. What will happen when the node finally appears, but has initial taints that prevent scheduling? Shall scheduler find new NNN for those pods then?

Adding to what @sanposhiho already mentioned above. NNN doesn't prevent scheduler from putting this pod elsewhere. So imagine that we have the NNN set to something invalid (whether non-existing node, overloaded node, doesn't matter). When there is a different place to put that pod and scheduler tries that pod, it will start with checking NNN, but it will fallback to other nodes if NNN doesn't work. So if there is a different place for it - scheduler will use it and place the pod there, despite badly chosen NNN.

This is what I also meant when we were discussing it internally by "as long as scheduler can say veto to decision set via NNN this seems fine" - and scheduler by definition can do that because NNN is (and will continue to be) only a hint of place that "we believe would work best for this pod".

simply be rejected by the scheduler (although the `NominatedNodeName` will remain set
for the unschedulability period).

#### Increasing the load to kube-apiserver

Setting a NominatedNodeName is an additional API call that then multiple components in the system
need to process. In the extreme case when this is always set before binding the pod, this would
double the number of API calls from scheduler, which isn't really acceptable from scalability and
performance reasons.

To mitigate this problem, we:
- skip setting `NNN` when all `Permit` and `PreBind` plugins have no work to do for this pod.
(We'll discuss how-to in the later section.)

For cases with delayed binding, we make an argument that the additional calls are acceptable, as
there are other calls related to those operations (e.g. PV creation, PVC binding, etc.) - so the
overhead of setting `NNN` is a smaller percentage of the whole e2e pod startup flow.

#### Race condition

> If an external component adds `NominatedNodeName` to the pod that is going through a scheduling cycle,

Reviewer 3: Note that async API KEP introduces a new race here, since scheduler could set NNN in its cache, but not in api. In the meantime external component can set it to something different, so when we receive the external update, we need to distinguish whether the different NNN is a NNN change that external component did or it's the race condition described above and it can be ignored.

Separating nomination hints should help us track external changes and allow us to always ignore any incoming NNNs (as we currently do), as scheduler is the only one who can set it.
IMHO it should help us  be more clear if we keep NNN in cache from NN (assume)

Reviewer 3: > I don't get what you want to say around this. You don't want to enable resource reservations made by other components at all? Please explicitly point out what is an imperfect story you're feeling, or I'd say, a problem on the current proposal. Otherwise, we cannot start a discussion of the cause of imperfections and how we can address/improve them.

Sorry for being unclear here, so let me just to clarify. What I meant is that resource reservation is quite a broad topic and I think we all agree that we're not discussing all possibilities and don't attempt to do that yet. This is why I'm calling it imperfect in this sense and not the ultimate reservation solution, which most likely will look differently (@wojtek-t is working on some more specific proposal).

So it's a bit unfortunate that nomination hints in fact also cause implicit reservation, but since we agreed that it's good enough, I think we can consider bringing Kueue case back. Even though they express scheduling constraints by setting node labels, giving scheduler nomination hint will allow us to bypass Filtering and Scoring phase completely, which may really matter for large workloads. WDYT?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

Yes - but it should be negligible impact.
The memory usage in kube-scheduler is supposed to increase by external components starting to use this
because when `NominatedNodeName` is added on the pods, the scheduler's internal component called `nominator` has to record them so that scheduling cycles can refer to them as necessary.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

No.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

The scheduler itself doesn't work anymore in that case.

###### What are other known failure modes?

Unknown.

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

- 7th May 2025: The initial KEP is submitted.

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: Two questions, that I'm not sure where to post:
- How `NominatedNodeName` plays with `NodeName`, can we ensure this is explicitly pointed out in this document? 
- Have you considered adding a PodSpec `NominatedNodeName` to cover the use-case Wojtek mentioned to clearly separate nomination (status) from hint (spec)? I'd imagine this being at least explored in the alternatives section with explicit reason why it was rejected.

Reviewer: 1) NNN is treated as "current plan of record", but something that is not necessarily a final decision.   NodeName is the actual binding decision.

2) Yes - it was explored and we decided that distinguishing that for now is not really needed and can be done in an additive way in the future. So let's not add the API until we are really sure it's needed.

while Pods, which are already scheduled, won't be affected.
If upgrading kube-apiserver fails somehow, the whole Kubernetes will not be able to function properly until rolling back.

Even if one of them cannot be upgraded properly somehow, and gets rolled back,
there'll be nothing behaving wrong in the scheduling flow, see [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy).

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

- The `schedule_attempts_total` metric with the `error` label is increasing abnormally.
- The `scheduler_pod_scheduling_sli_duration_seconds` or `scheduling_attempt_duration_seconds` gets too long.
  - Although, for pods that have to go through Permit/PreBind plugins, it's expected that their scheduling+binding latency would get higher because of an additional API call for NominatedNodeName.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

We will do the following manual test after implementing the feature:

1. upgrade
2. set NNN to non-existing node
3. ensure it won't get cleared
4. downgrade
5. ensure that it gets cleared
6. upgrade
7. set NNN to non-existing node

> 8. ensure it isn't cleared again

Reviewer 6: Normally, this is required for beta graduation, but given this is starting with beta it's hard to do the test before the implementation. But please once you land the code change to update this fragment of the document with the steps performed and results, and ping me so I'm aware this has happened.

rather it's just a preference.

#### Confusion if `NominatedNodeName` is different from `NodeName` after all

If an external component adds `NominatedNodeName`, but the scheduler picks up a different node,
`NominatedNodeName` is just overwritten by a final decision of the scheduler.

But, if an external component updates `NominatedNodeName` that is set by the scheduler, 
the pod could end up having different `NominatedNodeName` and `NodeName`.

Probably we should clear `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is bound. (at binding api)

#### What if there are multiple components that set `NominatedNodeName`

First of all, probably we should not recommend such situation.

But, one potential way to mitigate it would be having a validation rule that doesn't allow `NominatedNodeName` to be updated from one to another,
but only allow it to be set when it's empty.
The scheduler clears `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is unschedulable (i.e., the nominated node isn't schedulable too).
And, after that, external components can put a new preference on `NominatedNodeName`.

> Another potential way to completely solve it would be adding a new API `NominatedNodeNames` on the Pod so that it can accomodate all preferences from different components. But, that would be an implementation cost and I'm not sure if we have a use case where different components want to set `NominatedNodeNames` at the same pod, or one component wants to set multiple `NominatedNodeNames`.

Author: What do you think @dom4ha @wojtek-t

Author: Yeah, as implied on the KEP, I'm also -1 on NominatedNodeName **_s_** idea.

But, what do you think about this `What if there are multiple components that could set `NominatedNodeName` on the same pod` topic, in general? I'm concerned that multiple controllers keep overwriting NNN that is set by the others. Of course, we can regard such situation just as user's fault though. Should we just leave it, just recommending not to have such multiple controllers on the doc or somewhere? Or do we need some safe guard to prevent such?

Reviewer: I doubt that we will suddenly observe a spike in new components trying to utilize this field. So until we observe it as something problematic, I would probably limit to documenting this risk?

[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Use `NominatedNodeName` to express an pod placement, expected by the scheduler or expected by other components.

> The scheduler puts `NominatedNodeName` at the beginning of binding cycles to show an expected pod placement to other components.

Reviewer 3: If we put it at the beginning of each binding cycle, we'd double the load on api-server. 

Maybe we should set it in some cases only or leverage async api calls KEP (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5249) to do it some delay when the binding does not directly follow. On the other hand delaying it may increase a chance for races which we probably want to avoid.

Author: FWIW, the scheduling throughput is around 300 pods/s (would be higher/lower depending on the scenarios). So, the expected increase would be around 300 calls/s.

Reviewer 7: @kubernetes/sig-scalability is probably more relevant than api-machinery.

Doubling the number of API calls required to bind a pod seems really significant (and also doubles the watch events sent to all pod watchers for the scheduling phase of a pod). If the nominated node ends up not working out, I assume there has to be a removal / cleanup step as well?

Author: > If the nominated node ends up not working out, I assume there has to be a removal / cleanup step as well?

Yes, you're right. Although pods entering binding cycles _shouldn't_ fail frequently (ideally, at all).

Reviewer 3: This feature, but especially its future evolution, will definitely increase the load on api-server even if we put some delay, since nominations theoretically may change more often than binding (whenever scheduler or other component changes its mind regarding the desired workload placement).

@liggitt do you think we should bake in some rate limiting on changes per pod/workload the scheduler should obey?

@sanposhiho I think we could consider some delay by design and make other components aware of it. AFAIK Cluster Autoscaler already has some grace period before deciding to turn down a node.

Author: The rate limiting should already be implemented at client-go level. Users can configure it with their kubeconfig given to the scheduler. So, we can _technically_ say, if users appropriately configure the rate limiting on their kubeconfig based on their kube-apiserver capacity, the scheduler wouldn't overload kube-apiserver, or would hit the rate limiting that users configure. 
But, I know we cannot just make as many API calls as we want, assuming all users do a correct capacity planning, and configure the rate limiting on each component, including the scheduler.

Reviewer 7: it sounded like this would ~double the calls the scheduler makes in steady state while binding pods... is that the case?

Author: Right. Kube-scheduler makes other API calls (e.g., preemption, setting failure status etc) apart from binding pods on nodes, so surely less than double, but nearly.

Author: One mitigation idea here is, can we skip setting `NominatedNodeName` when pods have nothing to do with any PreBind plugins? (i.e., pods don't have any volume, any devices, etc that have to be handled at PreBind extension point) Once the pod enters the binding cycle, those pods go to Bind plugin almost immediately. So, probably it doesn't make sense to set `NominatedNodeName` to those pods.

It would significantly reduce the number of API calls to set `NominatedNodeName`. 
Although, if the cluster is full of pods with volumes etc, then it ends up doubling the number of API calls.

Reviewer 3: > The rate limiting should already be implemented at client-go level. Users can configure it with their kubeconfig given to the scheduler. (They have some default values, so even if users don't, the rate limiting should be enabled)

Good to know that there is such a mechanism. I suspect it's global, so uncontrolled number of less important updates may impact binding. Maybe we should "prioritize" operations as well? I know it sounds complex, but I suggested it as a goal in the async api calls KEP proposal we're considering in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5249

> One mitigation idea here is, can we skip setting `NominatedNodeName` when pods have nothing to do with any PreBind plugins? (i.e., pods don't have any volume, any devices, etc that have to be handled at PreBind extension point) Once the pod enters the binding cycle, those pods go to Bind plugin almost immediately. So, probably it doesn't make sense to set `NominatedNodeName` to those pods.

That's true and it was the original plan and we may end up doing that if we fail to come up with a neat generic approach of handling api calls asynchronously. Ideally we should have all possible api-calls outside of the scheduling loop (which we need for workload-aware scheduling) and having a generic approach to all type of updates could guarantee that the existing ones could be eliminated and no new ones added.

Author: /cc @macsko 
(The discussion here is getting related to the async API call too.)

> Maybe we should "prioritize" operations as well?

There could be several options, like having two different clients with different rate limiting setting etc.

But, my point with any ideas about the rate limiting is whether we could trust that users configure the rate limiting correctly, believe we wouldn't overload kube-apiserver as long as we follow it, and make as many requests as we want until hitting the rate limiting.
To put it simply, can we make this additional 300 calls/s API calls, as long as the rate limiting allows? or should we be concerned? I feel like the latter is true, though, then how could we know the maximum number of API calls we can make without overloading the kube-apiserver, which depends on clusters? @kubernetes/sig-scalability 

> a neat generic approach of handling api calls asynchronously

Yeah, that is actually the best approach.
We can control the number of all API calls made by the scheduler based on _something_ (Yes, either way, we need something; rate limiting? or should we have something else, not trusting a rate limiting, like I mentioned?)

But, this is the scope of https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5249, rather than this KEP. So, here, like you said, we can end up just skipping setting NNN for irrelevant pods, if we don't come up with any other good ideas we can take. After https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5249, we can reconsider.

Reviewer 8: In my opinion increasing number of API calls on Pods extremally problematic, as this is one of the type of objects which can significantly grow due to user generated content (usage of labels / environment variables storing full Python code etc).

If we are going to benchmark impact of this change, we need to account for large Pods.

@wojtek-t for opinion?

Author: > I can definitely imagine a case where most of pods have delayed binding, but in those cases I would claim it's actually ok to have this additional call. Because these will have other calls related to those operations (e.g. PV creation, etc.) - so the overhead of an additional call is effectively a smaller percentage of the e2e flow.

I like this reasoning. So, looks like everyone here is on the same page; skipping setting NNN when pods have nothing to do with PreBind plugins? @wojtek-t @dom4ha 
For advanced topics around the rate limiting, async call etc, we can continue at https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5249.

Reviewer: > I like this reasoning. So, looks like everyone here is on the same page; skipping setting NNN when pods have nothing to do with PreBind plugins? @wojtek-t @dom4ha

I would go this way.

> In my opinion increasing number of API calls on Pods extremally problematic

@jprzychodzen - on one hand yes, otoh it's all about the value they provide
as I wrote above, I'm more thinking in the context of overhead on the whole flow they provide. And from that perspective, the value of those (e.g. preventing workload disruptions) is actually worth them.

Reviewer 7: > I like this reasoning. So, looks like everyone here is on the same page; skipping setting NNN when pods have nothing to do with PreBind plugins? @wojtek-t @dom4ha

can the scheduler definitely tell when external PreBind plugins have no opinion about the pod, or will we only know for the in-tree ones based on our knowledge of what they are doing?

## Motivation

### External components need to know the pod is going to be bound 

The scheduler reserves the place for the pod when the pod is entering the binding cycle.
This reservation is internally implemented in the scheduler's cache, and is not visible to other components.

The specific problem is, as shown at [#125491](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125491),
if the binding cycle takes time before binding pods to nodes (e.g., PreBind takes time to handle volumes)
the cluster autoscaler cannot understand the pod is going to be bound there,
misunderstands the node is low-utilized (because the scheduler keeps the place of the pod), and deletes the node. 

We can expose those internal reservations with `NominatedNodeName` so that external components can take a more appropriate action
based on the expected pod placement.

### External components want to specify a preferred pod placement

The cluster autoscaler or Kueue internally calculates the pod placement,
and create new nodes or un-gate pods based on the calculation result. 

So, they know where those pods are likely going to be scheduled.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Author: > But the problem is - this node doesn't exist, so scheduler will look at it and effectively ignore it (because it doesn't exists).
So we want to ensure, that if the node set via NominatedNodeName doesn't exist, we will not clear that.

Good point. 

> we try to schedule, but if the pod is unschedulable and node with NNN name doesn't exist, we leave the NNN as is

I like this over others.
One additional point is what if the pod triggers the preemption. If the pod can go somewhere after the preemption, we should prioritize that, rather than waiting for a new node to be registered.
So, the condition (for not clearing NNN) should be:
- node with NNN doesn't exist
- the scheduler isn't trying to put a new NNN (i.e., the preemption hasn't triggered at the scheduling cycle)

> we don't even try to schedule if NNN doesn't exist [that is risky though, because if the node won't appear, we will never schedule]

Yeah, risky. If external components (or even the scheduler after the preemption) put the existing node name, but the node is deleted right after that, the pod could get stuck.
Also, if many existing running pods are deleted after CA triggers the node creation, we might be able to schedule pending pods over there without waiting for new nodes to come up.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer: > So, the condition (for not clearing NNN) should be:
- node with NNN doesn't exist
- the scheduler isn't trying to put a new NNN (i.e., the preemption hasn't triggered at the scheduling cycle)

Fair - if scheduler in the meantime found a different place for that pod, we should take that into account.

The main question that I have based on that is:
- do we really want to clear NNN first and later set it to the new value
- or do we actually want to allow for "changing NNN in place"
The later would allow us to avoid additional API call so I think we should consider it.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Author: Yeah, I mentioned to have a validation webhook to prevent "changing NNN" somewhere on the KEP though, probably we cannot. Performance perspective of course, and also an external component might set NNN between the moments between the scheduler clears it and sets a new value to it. (what should the scheduler do? clear it again, or give up setting a new value? complexity)

So, it's better to allow changing NNN from non-empty, with just one API call.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer 9: Even if the implementation were changed so that the CA knows the name of the node it plans to provision in advance, isn’t it still possible that the node might fail to be provisioned properly? For example, if compute resources or GPUs in a specific cloud zone are exhausted, the underlying instance might not be provisioned at all. In that case, wouldn't there be a need to change the NNN in place? Or does the CA (or Karpenter) only assign the NNN when it's certain that the node will eventually join the cluster?

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer: You could always change NNN by first clearing it and then setting a different value. So one-step change is more of an optimization.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Author: CA can change NNN if they detect the instance failed to start for some reasons, or the scheduler might change NNN if it runs the preemption for the pod. Or, even other external components can overwrite NNN somehow.
Otherwise, we don't have to change NNN (NNN for non-existing node would be just no-op).

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer 3: > As CA, when I'm creating some nodes I already computed some placement for that and would like to be able to let kube-scheduler to reuse that (if it places pods differently they may no longer fit)

Currently we cannot prevent kube-scheduler from placing pods differently, as the semantic of nomination is best effort in this regard. In particular, whenever scheduler changes CA decision, there is a risk that a group of pods would no longer be schedulable. I think we should clearly call it a non-goal and this type of scheduling would be hopefully covered by reservations.

> we try to schedule, but if the pod is unschedulable and node with NNN name doesn't exist, we leave the NNN as is

It sounds doable. There is a risk that NNN would point to no longer existing node, but scheduler would either find a new place for it or it would remain unschedulable and CA should find a new home for it.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer: +1 to both of your comments

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer 4: A potential improvement (though a much bigger change than this KEP on its own) would be to externalize upcoming nodes. Cluster Autoscaler currently only holds them in memory, while Karpenter has NodeClaims that are its own CRD. Making scheduler aware of upcoming nodes not only would let it make better decisions when handling pods with NNN set, it would also allow it to "schedule" pods on upcoming nodes when there is no capacity available, but we expect it to be provisioned. It could potentially even bring NNN field ownership back to scheduler, if upcoming nodes had a list of pods that triggered its creation.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Author: I love @x13n 's idea.

> By specifing their expectation on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler can first check whether the pod can go to the nominated node,

Reviewer: Agree, but it's much bigger change (not only touching scheduling and CA, but also other components, e.g. GC).
I would like this to happen too, but I don't think it necessarily should stop a flavor of this KEP to land first.

> speeding up the filter phase.

Reviewer 10: @mimowo TBH, I want to avoid pre-evaluation of Pod scheduling directives on Kueue side since that means Kueue needs to evaluate all Pod scheduling directives the same as kube-scheduler.

Reviewer 5: I would defiently prefer to avoid duplicating the code, but maybe it is possible for kube-scheduler to expose helpers which could be used by Kueue.

### Retain the scheduling decision

At the binding cycle (e.g., PreBind), some plugins could handle something (e.g., volumes, devices) based on the pod's scheduling result.

If the scheduler restarts while it's handling some pods at binding cycles,
kube-scheduler could decide to schedule a pod to a different node. 
If we can keep where the pod was going to go at `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler likely picks up the same node, and the PreBind plugins can restart their work from where they were before the restart.

### Goals

- The scheduler use `NominatedNodeName` to express where the pod is going to go before actually bound them.
- Make sure external components can use `NominatedNodeName` to express where they prefer the pod is going to.

>   - Probably, you can do this with a today's scheduler as well. This proposal wants to discuss/make sure if it actually works, and then add tests etc.

Author: This use case is something we were wondering if it could be useful to Kueue as well.
Although, as mentioned, it's not something you can force the scheduler to pick up a specific node for the pod. So, it's not an alternative to the node selector that you're doing (IIRC).

Author: @tenzen-y @mimowo

Reviewer 5: Does it make sense in some cases to do both, for example to improve performance of scheduling? I mean set the nodeSelector for specific node and indicate it with NominatedNodeName.

Author: No, NodeAffinity PreFilter filters out all nodes except your specified node at PreFilter, is essentially the same as setting your node to NominatedNodeName.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/03763fd1abdf0f5d3dfceb3a6b138bb643e37411/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/nodeaffinity/node_affinity.go#L163

Reviewer 5: I see, thanks for explaining.

Reviewer 10: cc: @mwielgus

Author: Is TAS in Kueue a hard requirement or best-effort? 
If it's a hard requirement, which we **must** respect it when scheduling, then I don't think we can utilize NominatedNodeName because the scheduler doesn't guarantee the pod is going to be bound to the nominated node, as mentioned on the KEP. 
To elaborate more, when higher priority pods are coming to the scheduling cycles, the scheduler ignores the reservation that is made by NominatedNodeName on the lower priority pods, and might schedule those higher priority pods on the reserved place.

If it's just a best-effort stuff, then Yes, you can utilize NominatedNodeName. The scheduler would try to schedule pods based on `NominatedNodeName`s, and fallback to other nodes if the nominated node cannot accommodate the pod anymore.

Reviewer 10: Kueue TAS has both levels, `required` and `preferred`. So, I think enforcing nominated nodes by Kueue to kube-scheduler is probably not possible.

This is one of the reasons why I want to avoid pre-scheduling in the Kueue side and fully rely on the kube-scheduler.
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5287#discussion_r2077481925

Reviewer 5: > Is TAS in Kueue a hard requirement or best-effort?

For `required` it is a requirement, for `preferred` it is best effort. We have use-cases for both modes by our users.

> This is one of the reasons why I want to avoid pre-scheduling in the Kueue side and want to fully rely on the kube-scheduler.

The direction here is still under discussion. I think the current leading idea by @mwielgus is that Kueue does full pre-scheduling respecting the directives, but is using the helper functions exposed by kube-scheduler.

Reviewer 10: > The direction here is still under discussion. I think the current leading idea by @mwielgus is that Kueue does full pre-scheduling respecting the directives, but is using the helper functions exposed by kube-scheduler.

Thank you for letting me know. However, does that mean to have an entire k/k vendoring in the Kueue side?

Author: > I think we should drop this use case for now.

At least it should be useful for CA, right? So, "nominated node name set by others" usecase itself is still valid, I believe. Also, I'm still wondering if preferred TAS can utilize this.

Reviewer 5: > I'm still wondering if preferred TAS can utilize this.

I would say since preferred TAS is "best effort", then yes. Moreover in Kueue TAS we have also "unconstrained" which could benefit from this, so aside from "required" it can be useful imo.

Reviewer 3: It depends what Kueue "best effort" means compared to scheduler "best effort". I worry that these may be very different, since the scheduler one may turn the Kueue placement into something completely different (without even trying TAS)

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### Race condition

If an external component adds `NominatedNodeName` to the pod that is going through a scheduling cycle,
`NominatedNodeName` isn't taken into account (of course), and the pod could be scheduled onto a different node.

But, this should be fine because, either way, we're not saying `NominatedNodeName` is something force the scheduler to pick up the node,
rather it's just a preference.

#### Confusion if `NominatedNodeName` is different from `NodeName` after all

If an external component adds `NominatedNodeName`, but the scheduler picks up a different node,
`NominatedNodeName` is just overwritten by a final decision of the scheduler.

But, if an external component updates `NominatedNodeName` that is set by the scheduler, 
the pod could end up having different `NominatedNodeName` and `NodeName`.

> Probably we should clear `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is bound. (at binding api)

Reviewer 4: Couldn't apiserver reject setting NominatedNodeName on bound pods?

> Probably we should clear `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is bound. (at binding api)

Author: > Couldn't apiserver reject setting NominatedNodeName on bound pods?

We can do that too. But, the scenario here is:
1. The binding cycle sets NNN.
2. Someone sets NNN. (while the binding cycle is still running)
3. The binding cycle calls the binding api.
4. NNN and NodeName would be different.

So, we need to clear NNN at the binding API.

> Probably we should clear `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is bound. (at binding api)

Reviewer: We need both (clearning NNN at binding and the preventing from settin NNN on bound pods)

But, one potential way to mitigate it would be having a validation rule that doesn't allow `NominatedNodeName` to be updated from one to another,
but only allow it to be set when it's empty.
The scheduler clears `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is unschedulable (i.e., the nominated node isn't schedulable too).
And, after that, external components can put a new preference on `NominatedNodeName`.

Another potential way to completely solve it would be adding a new API `NominatedNodeNames` on the Pod so that it can accomodate all preferences from different components. But, that would be an implementation cost and I'm not sure if we have a use case where different components want to set `NominatedNodeNames` at the same pod, or one component wants to set multiple `NominatedNodeNames`.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->
### The scheduler puts `NominatedNodeName`

> After the pod is permitted at `WaitOnPermit`, the scheduler needs to update `NominatedNodeName` with the node that it determines the pod is going to.

Reviewer: I just went through: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125491#issuecomment-2515331444

Is there anything we need to do to accomodate with @dom4ha described there about double-accounting?

Author: A new flow would be like this:
1. The scheduler decides where the pod goes to at the scheduling cycle.
2. At the end of the scheduling cycle, it "assumes" the pod on the node (= reserves the pod's place)
3. At the beginning of the binding cycle, it adds NNN to the Pod (added by this KEP)
4. The event handler receives the pod's update, which is getting NNN though, given the pod is assumed, the update is just ignored.

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ff74d46bf074476d798653584657ef974306053f/pkg/scheduler/eventhandlers.go#L155-L161

So, I don't see any problem here, though I'm not sure if I 100% understand what @dom4ha was concerned.

Reviewer 3: The point was that nominated node and assumed node are two different things for scheduler. We are now going to use one of these concepts to both cases, which was my concern.

Because of this concern we started discussions about reservations to better understand the problem space before we start changing nomination semantic. So on one hand, we'd like to move things forward and fix a few problems, but on the other hand, we may still want to continue investigating how other similar cases relate to the nomination.

I wonder whether we're in the position we understand them and we should jump into implementation, or use this proposal to explore various options. I'd prefer to avoid a situation when we use NNN just because it's easier to reuse something that already exists.

What do you think about listing different use cases first? The obvious ones that I see are:
1. Scheduler decides to preempt some pods and wants to inform other components that there is a pod which is about to take the freed up space (the final assignment decision can be change at any time)
2. Scheduler decided to bind a pod, but performs pre-binding steps first, so wants to inform other components that the binding process started (the final assignment is already decided, only consecutive preemption may change it)
3. CA case
4. Scheduler itself tries to find a place for group of pods in gang-scheduling case
5. Kueue case (external scheduler does gang-scheduling)
etc.

Author: Your 5 use cases are also what I could come up with now, but all of them don't seem problematic to me to just reuse NNN.

> I'd prefer to avoid a situation when we use NNN just because it's easier to reuse something that already exists.

Unless we come up with problems or further use cases that NNN cannot accommodate, it's natural to pick up the simplest solution, just reusing NNN. Rather, the ease/simplicity is actually a big factor. 
We can expand NNN's concept and still say NNN is the node name proposed for the next step, in general. If external components set it or preemption sets it, NNN means the proposal to the scheduling cycle. If the scheduling cycle sets it, NNN means the proposal to the binding cycle.

The scheduler puts `NominatedNodeName` at the beginning of binding cycles to show an expected pod placement to other components.
And, also other components can put `NominatedNodeName` on pending pods to indicate the pod is prefered to be scheduled on a specific node.

## Motivation

### External components need to know the pod is going to be bound 

The scheduler reserves the place for the pod when the pod is entering the binding cycle.
This reservation is internally implemented in the scheduler's cache, and is not visible to other components.

The specific problem is, as shown at [#125491](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125491),
if the binding cycle takes time before binding pods to nodes (e.g., PreBind takes time to handle volumes)
the cluster autoscaler cannot understand the pod is going to be bound there,
misunderstands the node is low-utilized (because the scheduler keeps the place of the pod), and deletes the node. 

We can expose those internal reservations with `NominatedNodeName` so that external components can take a more appropriate action
based on the expected pod placement.

> ### External components want to specify a preferred pod placement

Reviewer 3: One think that worries me the most is letting other components change the NNN that was set by scheduler. So far the assigned scheduler was the only owner, so if we change it, we'd have to think how it impacts existing processes. I'm not saying those are real problems, but I think the KEP should elaborate on them:

1. What if CA changes NNN that was set by scheduler as a part of the preemption or delayed binding process
2. Is it possible that components keep changing NNN for a pod because they run different logics
3. Does it matter if there are multiple schedulers?
4. How races are resolved (it should not be a problem, just we should describe it)

Reviewer: 1. I wanted to ask what if we say that CA can only set the NNN but can't change that. But then we actually face the problem that if the placement will no longer be valid, scheduler would have to clear it. And we have chicken and egg problem around that. I agree we need an answer here.

2, 3 and 4 - those are in my mental model the flavors of the same problem. If we can have more components trying to schedule the same pod - that's already a problem. So I would basically say that we should document that you need think through who can set NNN for a given pod in a given state and ensure that we have a single component responsible for doing that.

Reviewer 3: + @x13n 
Also the current semantic is that NNN is set in an "overallocation" mode, meaning that it's expected the preempted pods will disappear to make a place for the nominated one. 

- Doesn't CA ignores pods with NNN in its scaling decisions? How it could distinguish it's own nominations from preemption nominations?
- What if for whatever reason (not sure if it's possible) the nomination set by CA will be also in "overallocation" mode, but already running pods are not going to be turned down?
- Don't we have other components that may assume something about NNN semantic? I don't know much about Karpenter and many other components that might exist.

Let's dig deeper into CA's scale up scenario with `NominatedNodeName`.

To summarize the discussion, what happens when CA scales up is:
1. Pods are unschedulable. For the simplicity, let's say all of them are rejected by NodeResourceFit plugin. (i.e., no node has enough CPU/memory for pod's request)
2. CA finds them, calculates nodes necessary to be created
3. CA puts `NominatedNodeName` on each pod
4. The scheduler keeps trying to schedule those pending pods though, here let's say they're unschedulable (no cluster event happens that could make pods schedulable) until the node is created.
5. The nodes are created, and registered to kube-apiserver. Let's say, at this point, nodes have un-ready taints.
6. The scheduler observes `Node/Create` event, `NodeResourceFit` plugin QHint returns `Queue`, and those pending pods are requeued to activeQ.
7. The scheduling cycle starts handling those pending pods.
8. However, because nodes have un-ready taints, pods are rejected by `TaintToleration` plugin.
9. The scheduler clears `NominatedNodeName` because it finds the nominated node (= new node) unschedulable.

> So, after all, `NominatedNodeName` added by CA in this scaling up scenario doesn't add any value, unless the taints are removed in a short time (between 6 and 7).

Author: A new discussion point @dom4ha @wojtek-t. I don't come up with any good solution right now

Reviewer: Great finding. So I'm wondering about the potential options we have.

1. What if we changed the rules for clearing NNN even further? So instead of saying that we don't clear it when
(a) this node doesn't exist (b) we don't have to set the new node because we did some preemption to fit it elsewhere,
we actually change the rule to stick just to (b)?
What it would mean is:
- we update NNN only if we actually found a new place for the pod
- if it's set, but we can't find any new place - we just stick to that assuming that maybe there is something more behind that (e.g. exactly the node is still coming up or some other component is doing reshuffling to make space for this pod on that node)
I might be missing something - but this actually doesn't sounds bad.

The additional point is that we the point with detail design would also have to be updated:
`if new Node appears, within a given priority-level kube-scheduler is first processing the pods that have NominatedNodeName set to this node [to build on scheduling that was already made]`

because now it's needed not only when new node appears.
We would rather need some index like `node -> list of pods nominated to that node` and we should somehow take that into account on any scheduling.
Which may have performance implications - we need to think about it.

2. What if we actually track not "new node appeared", but rather somehow express "it's ready for scheduling for the first time"?
This sounds tricky though, because if node is tainted as you wrote, one may have tolerations for all existing taints - so the node is potentially schedulable already. 

3. Any other (potentially even bad) ideas?

Author: One option is to change the scheduler so that it does _not_ clean up NNN even when it determines a nominated node is unschedulable at the scheduling cycle. It means NNN remains until NNN is changed by someone (CA? the scheduler after preemption? others?).
But, if we do so, we'd get one downside, which is NNN calculation cost on the scheduling cycle. 

Usually, if pods don't have NNN, the scheduler just runs Filter plugins for all nodes in parallel. ([ref1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a39b6062060ffb4fba52f53c011bd00428db194/pkg/scheduler/schedule_one.go#L516), [ref2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a39b6062060ffb4fba52f53c011bd00428db194/pkg/scheduler/schedule_one.go#L658))
But, if NNN is set, the scheduler first checks the nominated node ([ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a39b6062060ffb4fba52f53c011bd00428db194/pkg/scheduler/schedule_one.go#L493-L502)), and then check others in parallel ([ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8a39b6062060ffb4fba52f53c011bd00428db194/pkg/scheduler/schedule_one.go#L516)). So, keeping NNN would be a cost of one additional iteration of Filter plugins on the scheduling cycle. 
That's what I meant by NNN calculation cost on the scheduling cycle.

Author: I posted without noticing your new comment. My idea looks the same as your (1). But, as I mentioned there, it has a concern of performance, which may or may not be big. I'm not sure how much that "one additional Filter plugins iteration" impacts the scheduling cycle performance.

Author: > What if we actually track not "new node appeared", but rather somehow express "it's ready for scheduling for the first time"?
This sounds tricky though, because if node is tainted as you wrote, one may have tolerations for all existing taints - so the node is potentially schedulable already.

It sounds like preCheck that we hated...
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/scheduler/backend/queue/scheduling_queue.go#L117-L120

We have preCheck to ignore node events if, for example, a new/updated node has taint, but pending pods in the unschedQ don't have toleration.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/scheduler/eventhandlers.go#L623-L642
But, as mentioned for several reasons, we intended to replace it with QHints.

Author: > if new Node appears, within a given priority-level kube-scheduler is first processing the pods that have NominatedNodeName set to this node [to build on scheduling that was already made]

Let me spawn a thread for this point:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5287#discussion_r2081079268
not to mix the topics

Reviewer: > I posted without noticing your new comment. My idea looks the same as your (1). But, as I mentioned there, it has a concern of performance, which may or may not be big. I'm not sure how much that "one additional Filter plugins iteration" impacts the scheduling cycle performance.

I'm not too worried about the impact of additional filter for 1 node - for small clusters scheduling throughput is not an issue and for larger ones, again the overhead of that is small [IIUC we have parallelism of 16, so with 1000 nodes you need 30 rounds anyway (that's an approximation of course) - so by adding one more we increase by 3%].
What I was talking about overhead, I mostly means the impact of processing pods with NNN first - but let's move to the other thread as you suggested.

Reviewer: I think so - yes.

}
```

The scheduler would run a new function `PreBindPreFlight()` before `PreBind()` functions, 
and if all PreBind plugins return Skip status from new functions, we can skip setting `NominatedNodeName`.

This is a similar approach we're doing with PreFilter/PreScore -> Filter/Score. 
We determine if each plugin is relevant to the pod by Skip status from PreFilter/PreScore, and then determine whether to run Filter/Score function accordingly.

In this way, even if users have some PreBind custom plugins, they can implement `PreBindPreFlight()` appropriately 
so that the scheduler can wisely skip setting `NominatedNodeName`, taking their custom logic into consideration.

### External components put `NominatedNodeName`

There aren't any restrictions preventing other components from setting NominatedNodeName as of now.
However, we don't have any validation of how that currently works.
To support the usecases mentioned above we will adjust the scheduler to do the following:
- if NominatedNodeName is set, but corresponding Node doesn't exist, kube-scheduler will NOT clear it when the pod is unschedulable [assuming that a node might appear soon]

> - if new Node appears, within a given priority-level kube-scheduler is first processing the pods that have NominatedNodeName set to this node [to build on scheduling that was already made]

Author: @wojtek-t 

Ah, I just copied->pasted your suggestion here though, actually how can we do this. I don't think it's possible because:
- pods with NNN might have to go through backoff (other unrelated pending pods have to wait for them?)
- activeQ doesn't know "which events triggered pods to move to activeQ/backoffQ

Reviewer: Copying my point here too:

What if we changed the rules for clearing NNN even further? So instead of saying that we don't clear it when
(a) this node doesn't exist (b) we don't have to set the new node because we did some preemption to fit it elsewhere,
we actually change the rule to stick just to (b)?
[...] now it's needed not only when new node appears.
We would rather need some index like node -> list of pods nominated to that node and we should somehow take that into account on any scheduling.
Which may have performance implications - we need to think about it.

> pods with NNN might have to go through backoff (other unrelated pending pods have to wait for them?)
> activeQ doesn't know "which events triggered pods to move to activeQ/backoffQ

Yeah.. - I think that breaks a bit the model, because conceptually we don't want to process pod, but rather the node and find something to be scheduled on it.

So let me throw a different idea - without looking into the code (I can't remember from the top of my head) - do we reserve any resources for pods with NNN set in schedulers memory? IIRC not.
But maybe if we would somehow store it, then the order and try to honor it - maybe the order won't matter that much, because we could treat those pods as "already reserving the space" and if we tried a different pod before - it just wouldn't fit.

Author: > do we reserve any resources for pods with NNN set in schedulers memory? IIRC not.

We do. (But, the higher priority pods can ignore those reservations.)
So, i think the order doesn't matter much, like you said?

Reviewer: > We do. (But, the higher priority pods can ignore those reservations.)
So, i think the order doesn't matter much, like you said?

So maybe that's actually all we need?
We just need to ensure that when external component sets NNN, scheduler will reflect that in its in-memory representation.
[BTW - can you point me to the code for that.]

With that, when the new node [for which some pods were already nominated to by CA] appears, then we will not be able to schedule other pods to it (because those with NNN set are already "occupying" it in the in-memory representation. Unless the other pod is higher-priority - in which case they will overwrite that as desired.

Does that make sense?

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg%2Fscheduler%2Fframework%2Fruntime%2Fframework.go#L978-L988

Yes, so we don't need any special ordering for pods with NNN, I believe.

Author: So, I will remove this part when I give a next update to kep

Reviewer: So instead of simply deleting it - maybe let's just explain the mechanism we will rely on - a combination of what you and I wrote above. Something like:
```
We will rely on the fact that a pod with NominatedNodeName set is resulting in the in-memory reservation for requested resources. Higher-priority pods can ignore it, but pods with equal or lower priority don't have access to these resources. This allows us to prioritize nominated pods when nomination was done by external components.

We just need to ensure that in case when NominatedNodeName was assigned by an external component, this nomination will get reflected in scheduler memory.
```

- Kueue uses it to determine a prefered node for the pod based on their internal calculation (Topology aware scheduling etc)

(Possibly, our future initiative around the workload scheduling (including gang scheduling) can also utilize it,
but we don't discuss it here because it's not yet concreted at all.)

#### Story 1: Prevent inappropriate scale downs by Cluster Autoscaler 

The scheduler starts to expose where the pod is going to with `NominatedNodeName` at the beginning of binding cycles.
And, the cluster autoscaler takes `NominatedNodeName` into consideration when calculating which nodes they delete.

It helps the scenarios where the binding cycles take time, for example, VolumeBinding plugin takes time at PreBind extension point.

#### Story 2: Cluster Autoscaler specifies `NominatedNodeName` to indicate where pods can go after new nodes are created/registered

Usually, the scheduler scans all the nodes in the cluster when scheduling pods.

When the cluster autoscaler creates instances for pending pods, it calculate which new node might get which pending pod.

> If they can put `NominatedNodeName` based on those calculation, it could tell the scheduler that the node can probably picked up for the pod's scheduling,

Reviewer 4: But scheduler can still process another pod earlier and land it on the new node, correct? NNN doesn't eliminate this race condition unless scheduler somehow reserves the capacity for pods with NNN set.

Author: > unless scheduler somehow reserves the capacity for pods with NNN set.

It actually does. When NNN is set to pending pod, the scheduler reserves the place for this pod on the node, and this reservation can only be ignored by higher priority pods.

prevenging the double effort of scanning/calculating all nodes again at the scheduling retries.

> #### Story 3: Kueue specifies `NominatedNodeName` to indicate where it prefers pods being scheduled to

Author: @mimowo @tenzen-y PTAL at this story and let me know if I'm mistaken or any modification you'd prefer to make

When Kueue determines where pods are prefered to being scheduled on, based on their internal scheduling soft constraints (Preferred Topology Aware Scheduling, etc)
currently, they just put the node selector to tell the scheduler about their preference, and then un-gate the pods.

After this proposal, they can specify `NominatedNodeName` instead of a prefered node selector, 
which makes the probability of pods being scheduled onto the node higher.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### Increasing the load to kube-apiserver

> If we simply implement this, we'd double the API calls during a simple binding cycle (NNN + actual binding),

Reviewer 4: Should we be concerned about additional load on apiserver coming from Cluster Autoscaler? Most of the time CA will generate much lower load than scheduler, but in case of failing a large cluster scale up there will be a spike of NNN setting, followed by NNN clearing.

Author: @kubernetes/sig-scalability @wojtek-t 
Any opinion on this? In short, the cluster autoscaler will want to put NNN on pods after scaling up nodes for them, and if the node creation somehow fails, it has to clear NNN or update NNN with a new value. So, those would be additional API calls from the cluster autoscaler.

Probably we should clear `NominatedNodeName` when the pod is bound. (at binding api)

#### What if there are multiple components that could set `NominatedNodeName` on the same pod

Multiple controllers might keep overwriting NominatedNodeName that is set by the others. 
Of course, we can regard that just as user's fault though, that'd be undesired situation.

There could be several ideas to mitigate, or even completely solve by adding a new API.
But, we wouldn't like to introduce any complexity right now because we're not sure how many users would start using this,
and hit this problem.

So, for now, we'll just document it somewhere as a risk, unrecommended situation, and in the future, we'll consider something
if we actually observe this problem getting bigger by many people starting using it.

#### [CA scenario] If the cluster autoscaler puts unexisting node's name on `NominatedNodeName`, the scheduler clears it

The current scheduler clears the node name from `NominatedNodeName` if the pod goes through the scheduling cycle,
and the node doesn't exist.

In order for the cluster autoscaler to levarage this feature,

> it has to put unexisting node's name, which is supposed to be registered later after its scale up,

Reviewer 4: nit: unexisting -> upcoming?

6. The scheduler observes `Node/Create` event, `NodeResourceFit` plugin QHint returns `Queue`, and those pending pods are requeued to activeQ.
7. The scheduling cycle starts handling those pending pods.
8. However, because nodes have un-ready taints, pods are rejected by `TaintToleration` plugin.
9. The scheduler clears `NominatedNodeName` because it finds the nominated node (= new node) unschedulable.

So, after all, `NominatedNodeName` added by CA in this scaling up scenario doesn't add any value, 
unless the taints are removed in a short time (between 6 and 7).

So, we need to keep the node's name on `NominatedNodeName` even when the node doesn't fit right now.
We'll discuss it at [Only modifying `NominatedNodeName`](#only-modifying-nominatednodename) section.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->
### The scheduler puts `NominatedNodeName`

> After the pod is permitted at `WaitOnPermit`, the scheduler needs to update `NominatedNodeName` with the node that it determines the pod is going to.

Reviewer 2: What if `WaitOnPermit` takes a long time and leads to similar CA problems as long `PreBind`? Of course, we don't have any in-tree plugin that uses the Permit phase, but shouldn't we consider it?

Author: > WaitOnPermit takes a long time

Right (I was too focus on PreBind prblem), should we set NNN before WaitOnPermit then?

Reviewer 2: Looks like we should do this before `WaitOnPermit`. So, I think we could set NNN iff any `Permit` plugin returned `Wait` or any `PreBindPreFlight` returned non-Skip.

This is a similar approach we're doing with PreFilter/PreScore -> Filter/Score. 
We determine if each plugin is relevant to the pod by Skip status from PreFilter/PreScore, and then determine whether to run Filter/Score function accordingly.

In this way, even if users have some PreBind custom plugins, they can implement `PreBindPreFlight()` appropriately 
so that the scheduler can wisely skip setting `NominatedNodeName`, taking their custom logic into consideration.

### External components put `NominatedNodeName`

There aren't any restrictions preventing other components from setting NominatedNodeName as of now.
However, we don't have any validation of how that currently works.
To support the usecases mentioned above we will adjust the scheduler to do the following:
- if NominatedNodeName is set, but corresponding Node doesn't exist, kube-scheduler will NOT clear it when the pod is unschedulable [assuming that a node might appear soon]
- We will rely on the fact that a pod with NominatedNodeName set is resulting in the in-memory reservation for requested resources. 
Higher-priority pods can ignore it, but pods with equal or lower priority don't have access to these resources. 

> This allows us to prioritize nominated pods when nomination was done by external components. 

Reviewer 4: Does that mean scheduler will process pods with NNN set before pods without NNN set as long as they have the same priority?

Author: This "prioritize" here is not about the scheduling order. It just says, if pod-A has NNN to node-A, then other pods, except higher priority ones, can steal the space of pod-A on node-A.
I'll change the wording to make it clearer.

> We just need to ensure that in case when NominatedNodeName was assigned by an external component, this nomination will get reflected in scheduler memory.

Reviewer 2: I don't fully understand this point. We would want to run Filter plugins **always** with GE priority nominated pods?

Author: Sorry, what's GE priority?

Reviewer 2: I meant greater than or equal priority. Right now, the second loop of Filter plugins runs on a cluster snapshot with all nominated pods deleted (virtually). Do we want to keep this or change to run the Filter plugins always (only) with greater than or equal priority nominated pods?

Reviewer 2: I meant greater than or equal priority. Okay, we do it now as well.

We are planning not to clear `nominatedNodeName` when the pod is unschedulable. What if the scheduling for such pod won't be successful for some reason for a long time, preventing lower priority pods from being temporarily scheduled on a node that is (virtually) occupied by the high priority nominated pod?

Reviewer 2: So probably it's worth to mention it in Risks and Mitigations section

We will implement integration tests simulating the above behavior of external components.

> #### The scheduler only modifies `NominatedNodeName`, not clears it in any cases

Reviewer 4: Should external components follow the same principle? When Cluster Autoscaler realizes the node didn't get provisioned, should it clear NNN or keep it as is, potentially overwriting when another scale up is triggered? Clearing may lead to race condition if scheduler wanted to trigger preemption, while leaving as is will mislead scheduler into thinking the node can still get provisioned. The latter will waste some CPU cycles, but perhaps is safer.

Author: > Should external components follow the same principle?
>
> or keep it as is, potentially overwriting when another scale up is triggered?

This could be a discussion point, but, for now, I'd say Yes: the cluster autoscaler can just leave NNN even if it failed to create a new node. (and overwrite with a new NNN potentially)

> leaving as is will mislead scheduler into thinking the node can still get provisioned

NNN to non-existing node would be just ignored. So, I don't see any problem.

Author: Hmm, thinking more about this clearning stuff, CA is ok because non-valid NNN is for non-existing node, which the scheduler can just ignore.

However, let's say an external component sets NNN to the existing node, but later, somehow, it notices this NNN is not valid anymore, and also it cannot find a new node to set to NNN for some reason. 
In this case, this external component would need to clear NNN...? otherwise the scheduler would keep reserving the pod's place on invalid NNN Node.

So, my final answer to your question is: For CA (or any similar external component that sets NNN to non-existing Nodes), you don't have to clear NNN. But, other components might sometimes need to clear NNN if their NNN isn't valid anymore.
You mentioned the race condition with the preemption, which is a good point. We need to instruct users not to use JSON / Merge / Strategic PATCH.... (I'm not an expert though, when it's PUT or SSA PATCH, kube-apiserver should return Conflict errors when such race condition happens, iiuc)

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I'm not an expert either - do we need someone from apimachinery to help figuring out how to avoid a race condition here?

Author: cc @wojtek-t 

I feel like we have two options here:
1. Suggest users clear NNN when NNN is no longer valid, and at the update, use PUT, SSA PATCH (or whatever?) to update NNN in the external component so that errors are returned to them in case of conflict.
2. We don't recommend users put NNN for existing nodes on un-gated pods, in the first place.
Then, we can completely avoid the race condition between the preemption and the external component. The external component (e.g., CA) can still put NNN for non-existing nodes on un-gated pods because they don't have to be worried about clearing NNN when it becomes invalid. As we discussed, NNN for non-existing pods is just ignored, no negative impact (except a tiny degradation on the scheduling cycle).

Reviewer: I think we may actually want both..

That being said - I went ahead and did a bunch of updates to the KEP myself based on some of my thoughts. 
[though I only referred to the first one, independently from your suggestion] 
This is built on top of this PR, but I opened another one:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5329

@sanposhiho - please take a look and if the changes make sense to you, we should merge those two somehow. If some changes don't make sense to you let me know

Author: We only need either 1 or 2. The problem is the conflict that would happen if the preemption tries to update NNN, and the external component tries to clear NNN at the same timing. e.g., The external component wants to remove NNN that they set, the preemption updates NNN, the external component doesn't notice NNN's update, and removes NNN, which it thinks it's theirs, but actually is just set by the preemption.

If we go with (1), the external component should receive Conflict errors properly. If we go with (2), the conflict wouldn't happen in the first place.

---

Awesome, will take a look at your PR by the end of today.
